---
author: Clark Davis
date: '2022-01-02'
layout: blog
title: Handle Crafting
---

# how to make a handle

When our ancestors broke the handle of an axe or a shovel, they often didn't go to the store to buy a new one. They likely lived far away from a store anyhow. How would they fix their tools then? By making new ones themselves.

There is no better way to learn that to learn by doing. For this reason we often sell tools without handles. You may be surprised at how easy this is to do, if you have the right tools.

# tools

For this project, you will need:

* one axe
* one hand saw
* one draw knife

optional nice to haves:

* spoke shave
* froe and mallet

A spoke shave can be advantageous to get a nice finished surface, but is not necessary if you carve with a steady, controlled hand. A froe is convenient for splitting, but an axe will do as well.

# materials

The materials needed are:

* one piece of wood from which to shape a handle

A bonus is some linseed oil to finish the handle, which will be addressed.

Hard wood lasts longer. Keep that in mind as you are selecting your piece of wood. Also a more continuous grain through the wood will reduce chances of breakage. How this is achieved will be addressed below.

# the build

Let's see how we can select the best piece of wood. In our case we have selected wood from a fallen ash tree. Ash is a popular wood for handles because it is a very strong wood and is also light. Ash was also the favorite material for baseball bats before composite materials became widely adopted.

Since the wood is still in a log, that gives us the ideal situation to extract a piece with grain running throughout. To do this, we first cut the log so it is the length of the handle we wish to have plus a few inches. Now is the fun part where we slit the wood. Splitting the wood will garuantee that the wood fibers run the entire length of the handle, providing more strength against the shock it will experience. Be generous with your first splitting to provide ample room for irregularities in the wood.

This next step is only if the handle will be radially symmetrical. Use your axe to chop one end of the wood to a point. this will be used to spin the wood and look down it lengthwise, checking for symmetry

Make an outline sketch on the wood if you plan to make a non-symetrical handle, such as for an axe.

Next, use your draw knife to remove wood and create a rough shape of the handle. Remember you can always take away wood if you leave enough, but you cannot add wood back if you take a way too much. Look at the handle at different angles and feel it in your hand to be sure it is becoming the propoer shape.

Continue to remove wood with the draw knife, observe the shape, and feel the shape until it is very close to the desired shape. If you have a spoke shave, you can now make the handle very smooth. Another option is to scrape your draw knife along the handle at a ninety degree angle and perpendicular to the length of the handle. This will remove material at a slower rate and make it easier to smooth the surface.

Make sure that the handle is narrower at one end and flares out thicker for the rest, such that the tool head fits on the narrow end, but cannot slip all the way down the shaft. Once this is the case, cut a slit in the part that will hold the head. Put on the head, then hammer a wedge in the slit so it expands and holds the head securely.

Apply a coat of linseed oil. wipe up any excess. Wait until the handle is dry to the touch and not tacky. Repeat two times.

Congratulations, you have crafted a tool handle, secured it to the tool, and given it a finish to protect it from the elements.
